{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww22740\viewh11400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 "Term_Phrase_Item","Category","Definition_Origin_Example","Tags"\
"Afanar","SLANG (Slang - General)","To steal, to rob. Origin: From old Spanish popular language, widely used in Lunfardo. Example: ""Le afanaron la billetera en el subte."" (They stole his wallet on the subway.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo"\
"Ajoba","SLANG (Slang - General)","Down, below (Vesre of ""abajo""). Example: ""El perro est\'e1 ajoba de la mesa."" (The dog is under the table.)","Slang Terms, Vesre, Location"\
"Al \'f1udo","SLANG (Slang - General)","Uselessly, in vain. (Similar to ""al cuete"" or ""al divino bot\'f3n""). Example: ""Intent\'e9 arreglarlo, pero fue al \'f1udo."" (I tried to fix it, but it was useless.)","Slang Terms, Idiom, Futility"\
"Al palo","SLANG (Slang - General)","At full speed, at maximum intensity; very active or excited. Context: Informal, energetic. Example: ""La m\'fasica estaba al palo."" (The music was at full blast.) ""El tipo labura al palo todo el d\'eda."" (The guy works at full tilt all day.)","Slang Terms, informal, energetic"\
"Apoliyar / Apolillar","SLANG (Slang - General)","To sleep, to nap. Origin: Neapolitan ""appollaiare"" (to roost). Status: Understood, somewhat classic slang. Example: ""Despu\'e9s de almorzar, me gusta apoliyar un rato."" (After lunch, I like to nap for a bit.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, neapolitan origin, classic slang"\
"Atorrante","SLANG (Slang - General)","Vagrant, lazy person; shameless, brazen person; scoundrel. Origin: Spanish, possibly from a brand of sewer pipes ""A. Torrant"" where vagrants slept. Status: Widely used, can be quite pejorative. Example: ""Ese tipo es un atorrante, no quiere trabajar."" (That guy is a bum, he doesn't want to work.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, pejorative"\
"Bac\'e1n","SLANG (Slang - General)","Wealthy and elegant man; someone who lives well; also used ironically. Origin: Genovese ""bac\'e0n"" (boss, master). Originally also meant a man who keeps a mistress, pimp. Status: Understood, often with classic/tango era connotations. Example: ""Vive como un bac\'e1n, con muchos lujos."" (He lives like a wealthy man, with many luxuries.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, genovese origin, classic slang, tango era"\
"Bagarto","SLANG (Slang - General)","(Pejorative, augmentative of Bagayo) Very ugly person or thing; something of very low quality. Example: ""Ese auto es un bagarto, se cae a pedazos."" (That car is a real piece of junk, it's falling apart.)","Slang Terms, Pejorative, Augmentative"\
"Bagayo","SLANG (Slang - General)","(Pejorative) Ugly person; something of low quality or in bad taste. Example: ""Ese cuadro es un bagayo."" (That painting is tacky.)","Slang Terms, pejorative"\
"Bardo","SLANG (Slang - General)","Trouble, a mess, a complicated or chaotic situation, a fight. Example: ""Se arm\'f3 bardo en el boliche."" (A fight/trouble started at the club.) / ""No quiero bardo."" (I don't want any trouble.)","Slang Terms, Trouble, Chaos, Fight"\
"B\'e1rbaro/a","SLANG (Slang - General)","Awesome, fantastic, great; can also mean terrible or wild depending on context and intonation. Example: ""\'a1Qu\'e9 noche b\'e1rbara!"" (What an awesome night!) / ""Hac\'eda un fr\'edo b\'e1rbaro."" (It was terribly cold.)","Slang Terms, Adjective, Intensifier, Context Dependent"\
"Batir","SLANG (Slang - General)","To tell, reveal, confess, spill the beans. Origin: Spanish ""batir"" (in old slang, to confess). Status: Understood, common in contexts of revealing information. Example: ""Me bati\'f3 que se iba de viaje."" (He told me he was going on a trip.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo"\
"Berreta","SLANG (Slang - General)","Low quality, cheap, shoddy. Origin: Italian, possibly from ""berretto"" (cap). Status: Widely used. Example: ""Compr\'e9 unos zapatos berretas y se rompieron enseguida."" (I bought some shoddy shoes and they broke right away.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, italian origin"\
"Birra","SLANG (Slang - General)","Beer. Origin: From Italian ""birra."" Example: ""\'bfTomamos unas birras?"" (Shall we have some beers?)","Slang Terms, italian origin, loanword"\
"Boliche","SLANG (Slang - General)","Nightclub, bar, disco. Can also refer to a small, traditional shop or store. Context: ""Nightclub"" is the more common youth meaning. Example: ""\'bfVamos al boliche esta noche?"" (Are we going to the club tonight?)","Slang Terms, youth usage"\
"Boludo/a","SLANG (Slang - General)","(Highly context-dependent) Idiot, jerk (insult); Dude, mate, pal (familiar address). Origin: Spanish. Etymologically ""big-balled."" Context: Can be a strong insult or a very common, neutral, or even affectionate term among friends. Learners should use with extreme caution. Example (insult): ""\'a1No seas boludo, eso no se hace!"" (Don't be an idiot, you don't do that!) Example (familiar): ""Che, boludo, \'bfqu\'e9 hac\'e9s?"" (Hey man, what are you doing?)","Slang Terms, insult, familiar address, caution"\
"Bondi","SLANG (Slang - General)","Bus (public transport). Origin: From Brazilian Portuguese ""bond"" (referring to tram tickets), adopted into Lunfardo. Example: ""Voy a tomar el bondi para ir al centro."" (I'm going to take the bus to go downtown.)","Slang Terms, brazilian portuguese origin, lunfardo, loanword"\
"Broli","SLANG (Slang - General)","Book (Vesre of ""libro""). Example: ""Pasame ese broli."" (Pass me that book.)","Slang Terms, Vesre, Objects"\
"Bronca","SLANG (Slang - General)","Anger, frustration, annoyance; a difficult situation; a fight, brawl. Origin: Italian ""broncio"" (pout, sulk) or Spanish ""bronco"" (rough). Status: Widely used. Example: ""Tengo una bronca b\'e1rbara porque perd\'ed el tren."" (I'm incredibly frustrated because I missed the train.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, italian origin"\
"Bufoso","SLANG (Slang - General)","Pistol, firearm (Lunfardo). Example: ""El ladr\'f3n sac\'f3 un bufoso."" (The thief pulled out a pistol.)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, Weapon"\
"Bul\'edn","SLANG (Slang - General)","Bachelor pad, a modest room or apartment, often for trysts or a young person's dwelling. Origin: French ""boulin"" (pigeonhole) or Italian ""bolino"" (stamp for bread). Status: Understood, classic Lunfardo, often heard in tangos. Example: ""Se encontr\'f3 con su amante en el bul\'edn."" (He met his lover in the bachelor pad.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, french origin, italian origin, classic lunfardo, tango"\
"Cana","SLANG (Slang - General)","Police; jail. Origin: French ""canne"" (cane, police officer's stick) or vesre of ""bot\'f3n"" (police). Status: Widely used and understood. Example: ""Lo metieron en cana por robar."" (They put him in jail for stealing.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, french origin, vesre"\
"Canchero/a","SLANG (Slang - General)","Skilled, expert, smooth operator; someone with experience or confidence; sometimes implies cockiness. Origin: Quechua ""kancha"" (enclosure, field) + Spanish suffix. Status: Widely used. Example: ""Es muy canchero para negociar."" (He's very skilled at negotiating.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, quechua origin"\
"Capo","SLANG (Slang - General)","Boss, master, someone who is very skilled or in charge; a top person. (From Italian ""capo"" - head). Example: ""Messi es un capo jugando al f\'fatbol."" (Messi is a master at playing football.)","Slang Terms, italian origin, skill, respect"\
"Careta","SLANG (Slang - General)","(Pejorative) Fake person, hypocrite; someone who pretends to be something they are not (often more ""proper"" or ""moral""). Origin: Literally ""mask."" Example: ""Dice que no toma alcohol, pero es un careta, lo vi en la fiesta."" (He says he doesn't drink alcohol, but he's a hypocrite, I saw him at the party.)","Slang Terms, pejorative"\
"Chab\'f3n/a","SLANG (Slang - General)","Guy, dude, fellow; girl/woman. Origin: From Spanish ""chamb\'f3n"" (clumsy person), common in Lunfardo. Context: Generally neutral but can be slightly pejorative or dismissive depending on tone and context. Example: ""Ese chab\'f3n de all\'e1 me est\'e1 mirando."" (That guy over there is looking at me.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, neutral, potentially pejorative"\
"Chamullero/a","SLANG (Slang - General)","A smooth talker, a player, someone skilled at ""chamuyo"" (persuasive or deceptive talk, flirting). Example: ""Ese tipo es un chamullero, no le creas nada."" (That guy is a smooth talker, don't believe anything he says.)","Slang Terms, Noun, Personality, Deception, Flirting"\
"Chamuyo / Chamuyar","SLANG (Slang - General)","Sweet talk, persuasive talk, smooth talk, flirting; to sweet-talk, flirt, try to convince, bluff. Origin: Cal\'f3 (Spanish Romani) ""chamuya"" (talk). Status: Fully mainstream. See also ""Unique Local Words/Concepts."" Example: ""No me vengas con chamuyos."" (Don't give me that nonsense.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, calo origin, mainstream, unique concept"\
"Che","SLANG (Slang - General)","Ubiquitous interjection: ""hey,"" ""hey you,"" ""man,"" ""dude,"" ""mate,"" or to get someone's attention. Can also be a filler word. A hallmark of Argentinian Spanish. Origin: Debated, possibly indigenous or an apocope. Example: ""Che, \'bfme pas\'e1s la sal?"" (Hey, can you pass me the salt?)","Slang Terms, interjection, filler word, hallmark"\
"Chele","SLANG (Slang - General)","Milk (Vesre of ""leche""). Often used to refer to semen in a vulgar context. Example (neutral for milk): ""\'bfQuer\'e9s chele con el feca?"" (Want milk with the coffee?)","Slang Terms, Vesre, Food, Drink, Vulgar potential"\
"Chochamu","SLANG (Slang - General)","Young man, guy (Vesre of ""muchacho""). Example: ""Ese chochamu es mi hermano."" (That guy is my brother.)","Slang Terms, Vesre, People"\
"Copado/a","SLANG (Slang - General)","Cool, great, awesome, nice (person or thing). Context: Informal, positive. Example: ""\'a1Qu\'e9 copada tu remera!"" (Your t-shirt is so cool!)","Slang Terms, informal, positive"\
"Engrupir","SLANG (Slang - General)","To deceive, trick, con. Origin: Genovese ""gr\'f3ppo"" (knot, implying trickery). Status: Understood, common. Example: ""Me engrupi\'f3 con una historia falsa."" (He tricked me with a false story.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, genovese origin"\
"Facha","SLANG (Slang - General)","(Good) looks, appearance, face; a good-looking person. Origin: From Italian ""faccia"" (face). Example: ""Tiene buena facha ese actor."" (That actor has good looks.)","Slang Terms, italian origin, loanword"\
"Fato","SLANG (Slang - General)","Affair, business, matter (often illicit or secret). Origin: Italian ""fatto"" (done, fact). Example: ""Ten\'eda un fato con el jefe."" (He had an affair/deal with the boss.)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, Affair, Business"\
"Feca","SLANG (Slang - General)","Coffee (Vesre of ""caf\'e9""). Example: ""Necesito un feca para despertarme."" (I need a coffee to wake up.)","Slang Terms, vesre, food, drink"\
"Fiaca","SLANG (Slang - General)","Laziness, lack of energy, unwillingness to do something, lethargy. Origin: From Italian ""fiacca"" (weariness, laziness). Example: ""Hoy tengo una fiaca terrible, no quiero hacer nada."" (Today I feel terribly lazy, I don't want to do anything.)","Slang Terms, italian origin, loanword, unique concept"\
"Fierro","SLANG (Slang - General)","Firearm; also used for cars or tools (literally ""iron""). Example: ""El tipo andaba con un fierro en la cintura."" (The guy was carrying a gun at his waist.) / ""\'a1Qu\'e9 buen fierro ten\'e9s!"" (What a great car you have!)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, Weapon, Car, Tool"\
"Fungi","SLANG (Slang - General)","Mushroom; in Lunfardo, it means ""hat"". Example: ""Se puso el fungi y sali\'f3."" (He put on his hat and left.)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, Clothing, Vesre potential"\
"Gamba","SLANG (Slang - General)","One hundred pesos (older slang); also leg. Example: ""Me cost\'f3 dos gambas."" (It cost me 200 pesos.) / ""Me duele la gamba."" (My leg hurts.)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, Money, Body Part"\
"Gapar","SLANG (Slang - General)","To pay (Vesre of ""pagar""). Example: ""Hoy me toca gapar a m\'ed."" (Today it's my turn to pay.)","Slang Terms, Vesre, Money, Action"\
"Garpar","SLANG (Slang - General)","To pay (Vesre of ""pagar,"" more common form than ""gapar""). Example: ""Hay que garpar la cuenta."" (We have to pay the bill.)","Slang Terms, Vesre, Money, Action"\
"Gomina","SLANG (Slang - General)","Hair gel, brilliantine. Also, by extension, a somewhat old-fashioned dandyish style. Example: ""Se peinaba con gomina."" (He styled his hair with gel.)","Slang Terms, Grooming, Style"\
"Gom\'eda","SLANG (Slang - General)","Friend (Vesre of ""amigo""). Example: ""\'bfQu\'e9 hac\'e9s, gom\'eda?"" (What are you doing, friend?)","Slang Terms, Vesre, People, Friendship"\
"Groso/a","SLANG (Slang - General)","Awesome, great, brilliant, expert (person); something impressive. Origin: From Portuguese ""grosso"" (thick, coarse), adopted in Brazil then Argentina. Literally ""thick, big."" Example: ""Messi es un groso."" (Messi is awesome.)","Slang Terms, portuguese origin, loanword"\
"Guarda","SLANG (Slang - General)","Look out! Be careful! (From Italian ""guarda!"" - look!). Example: ""\'a1Guarda que viene un auto!"" (Look out, a car is coming!)","Slang Terms, Interjection, Warning, Italian Origin"\
"Guita","SLANG (Slang - General)","Money. Origin: From Spanish popular language, common in Lunfardo. Example: ""No tengo guita para el cine."" (I don't have money for the cinema.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo"\
"Hincha pelotas","SLANG (Slang - General)","(Vulgar) Annoying person, a pain in the ass (literally ""ball itcher/inflater""). Example: ""No seas hincha pelotas y dejame en paz."" (Don't be a pain and leave me alone.)","Slang Terms, Insult, Annoying, Vulgar"\
"Joda","SLANG (Slang - General)","Party, fun, a good time; can also mean a prank or messing around. Example: ""Vamos a la joda de Mart\'edn."" (Let's go to Martin's party.) / ""Dejate de joder."" (Stop messing around.)","Slang Terms, Noun, Party, Fun, Prank"\
"Joya","SLANG (Slang - General)","Great, cool, perfect, OK. (Literally ""jewel""). Context: Used to express agreement or that something is fine. Example: ""\'97\'bfNos vemos a las cinco? \'97Joya."" (\'97Shall we meet at five? \'97Great.)","Slang Terms, agreement"\
"Junar","SLANG (Slang - General)","To look at, to watch, to check out; to know or realize (Lunfardo, from Cal\'f3). Example: ""Lo estuve junando toda la noche."" (I was watching him all night.) / ""No juno a ese tipo."" (I don't know that guy.)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, Calo Origin, Look, Know"\
"Laburar","SLANG (Slang - General)","To work. Origin: From Italian ""lavorare"" (to work). Example: ""Tengo que laburar ma\'f1ana."" (I have to work tomorrow.)","Slang Terms, italian origin, loanword"\
"Laburo","SLANG (Slang - General)","Work, job. Origin: From Italian ""lavoro"" (work). Example: ""Consegu\'ed un laburo nuevo."" (I got a new job.)","Slang Terms, italian origin, loanword"\
"Ladri","SLANG (Slang - General)","Thief, scoundrel (often used more broadly than just a literal thief). Origin: Italian ""ladro"" (thief). Status: Understood, common. Example: ""Ese pol\'edtico es un ladri."" (That politician is a crook.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, italian origin"\
"Lonyipietro","SLANG (Slang - General)","Fool, idiot (complex Vesre, possibly from ""petrolini"" or similar, meaning clown/fool). Example: ""No seas lonyipietro."" (Don't be a fool.)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, Vesre, Insult"\
"Lope","SLANG (Slang - General)","Hair (Vesre of ""pelo""). Example: ""Tiene el lope largo."" (He/She has long hair.)","Slang Terms, Vesre, Body Part"\
"Lorca","SLANG (Slang - General)","Heat (Vesre of ""calor""). Example: ""\'a1Qu\'e9 lorca hace hoy!"" (It's so hot today!)","Slang Terms, Vesre, Weather"\
"Luca","SLANG (Slang - General)","One thousand pesos. Example: ""Esto sale dos lucas."" (This costs two thousand pesos.)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, Money"\
"Macana","SLANG (Slang - General)","A blunder, a mess-up, something unfortunate or annoying; a lie or tall tale. Can also mean a police truncheon (less common now). Example: ""\'a1Qu\'e9 macana! Se me rompi\'f3 el celular."" (What a bummer! My phone broke.) / ""No le creas, es pura macana."" (Don't believe him, it's all BS.)","Slang Terms, misfortune, lie, versatile"\
"Mango","SLANG (Slang - General)","Money (specifically, a peso). Example: ""No tengo un mango."" (I don't have any money.)",""\
"Manyar","SLANG (Slang - General)","To eat; to know, to understand (Lunfardo, from Italian/Venetian ""magnar"" - to eat). Example (eat): ""Vamos a manyar algo."" (Let's go eat something.) Example (know): ""\'bfMany\'e1s lo que te digo?"" (Do you get what I'm saying?)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, Italian Origin, Eat, Know, Understand"\
"Matina","SLANG (Slang - General)","Morning (from Italian ""mattina""). Example: ""Nos vemos a la matina."" (See you in the morning.)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, Italian Origin, Time"\
"Merca","SLANG (Slang - General)","(Derogatory/Colloquial) Drugs, especially cocaine. (Short for ""mercader\'eda"" - merchandise). Example: ""Ese lugar es peligroso, venden merca."" (That place is dangerous, they sell drugs.)","Slang Terms, Drugs, Pejorative"\
"Mina","SLANG (Slang - General)","(Informal) Woman, girl, chick. Origin: Lunfardo, from Italian slang (possibly related to ""femmina"" or perceived richness/value, like a ""mine""). Context: Can be neutral but sometimes considered slightly objectifying or dated depending on the speaker and context. Example: ""Esa mina es muy inteligente."" (That woman is very intelligent.)","Slang Terms, informal, lunfardo, italian origin, potentially dated, potentially objectifying"\
"Morfar","SLANG (Slang - General)","To eat. Origin: Lunfardo, from Italian ""morfa"" (mouth) or a related dialectal term for eating. Example: ""\'bfQu\'e9 vamos a morfar hoy?"" (What are we going to eat today?)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, italian origin"\
"Naso","SLANG (Slang - General)","Nose (from Italian ""naso""). Example: ""Tiene un naso grande."" (He has a big nose.)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, Italian Origin, Body Part"\
"Nerca","SLANG (Slang - General)","Meat (Vesre of ""carne""). Example: ""Compramos nerca para el asado."" (We bought meat for the barbecue.)","Slang Terms, Vesre, Food"\
"Ortiba","SLANG (Slang - General)","(Pejorative) Killjoy, party pooper, uncooperative person, spoilsport. Origin: Vesre (syllable inversion) of ""batidor"" (informer, snitch). Status: Widely used, understood. Also used by youth. Example: ""No seas ortiba, ven\'ed con nosotros."" (Don't be a killjoy, come with us.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, pejorative, vesre, youth usage"\
"Palo","SLANG (Slang - General)","One million pesos (older slang); also a stick or a ""buck"" (dollar, in ""palo verde""). Example: ""Gan\'f3 un palo en la loter\'eda."" (He won a million pesos in the lottery.)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, Money"\
"Percanta","SLANG (Slang - General)","Young woman, girl (Lunfardo, often used in tango lyrics, can be slightly pejorative or dated). Example: ""Una linda percanta pas\'f3 por la calle."" (A pretty young woman walked down the street.)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, People, Tango, Dated"\
"Pescar","SLANG (Slang - General)","To understand, to get it (Figurative, like ""to catch on""). Example: ""\'bfPescas la idea?"" (Do you get the idea?)","Slang Terms, Verb, Understand"\
"Pibe/Piba","SLANG (Slang - General)","Kid, boy, young man; girl, young woman. Origin: Lunfardo, from Italian Genovese ""pivetto"" or Italian slang ""pivello"" (novice, youngster). Can be affectionate. Example: ""Los pibes est\'e1n jugando en la plaza."" (The kids are playing in the square.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, italian origin, affectionate"\
"Pilcha","SLANG (Slang - General)","Clothes, outfit, attire. Origin: Araucano/Mapudungun ""pilcha / pulcha"" (wrinkle; clothing item). Status: Widely used. Example: ""Se compr\'f3 pilcha nueva para la fiesta."" (He/She bought new clothes for the party.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, araucano/mapudungun origin"\
"Piola","SLANG (Slang - General)","Clever, cool, smart, good-natured, resourceful. Can also mean string/twine. Example: ""Es un tipo piola, siempre te ayuda."" (He's a cool/good guy, he always helps you.) / ""Dame un piol\'edn para atar esto."" (Give me a string to tie this.)","Slang Terms, positive, versatile"\
"Plata","SLANG (Slang - General)","Money (silver). A very common term for money. Example: ""No tengo plata para salir."" (I don't have money to go out.)","Slang Terms, Noun, Money"\
"Posta","SLANG (Slang - General)","Truth, for real, seriously. Origin: Literally ""post, relay station"" (archaic). Context: Used to affirm something or question its truth. Example: ""Te lo digo posta, no estoy mintiendo."" (I'm telling you for real, I'm not lying.)","Slang Terms, affirmation"\
"Pucho","SLANG (Slang - General)","Cigarette butt; a cigarette; a small amount of something. Origin: Quechua ""puchu"" (leftover, remainder). Status: Widely used. Example: ""Dame un pucho."" (Give me a cigarette.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, quechua origin"\
"Putear","SLANG (Slang - General)","To curse, to swear, to insult someone using strong language. Example: ""Se puso a putear a todo el mundo."" (He started cursing everyone out.)","Slang Terms, Verb, Insult, Vulgar"\
"Quilombo","SLANG (Slang - General)","A mess, chaos, disorder; a complicated or problematic situation. Origin: From Quimbundo (African language) ""kilombo"" (village, particularly of fugitive slaves in Brazil), then to mean brothel (older Lunfardo meaning), then generalized to mess/disorder. Can be considered vulgar by some. Example: ""\'a1Qu\'e9 quilombo es este tr\'e1fico!"" (What a mess this traffic is!)","Slang Terms, african origin, lunfardo, potentially vulgar, unique concept"\
"Rajar","SLANG (Slang - General)","(1) To fire someone from a job. (2) To leave quickly, to scram. Example (1): ""Lo rajaron del laburo."" (They fired him from work.) Example (2): ""Raj\'e1 de ac\'e1."" (Scram from here.)","Slang Terms, Verb, Work, Leaving"\
"Telo","SLANG (Slang - General)","A pay-by-the-hour hotel used for romantic encounters (Vesre of ""hotel,"" with a specific connotation). Example: ""Fueron a un telo despu\'e9s del boliche."" (They went to a love hotel after the club.)","Slang Terms, Vesre, Place, Romantic"\
"Tordo","SLANG (Slang - General)","Doctor or lawyer (Vesre of ""doctor,"" tordo is also a bird name). Example: ""Tengo cita con el tordo."" (I have an appointment with the doctor/lawyer.)","Slang Terms, Vesre, Profession"\
"Troesma","SLANG (Slang - General)","Master, teacher, skilled person (Vesre of ""maestro""). Example: ""Es un troesma de la guitarra."" (He's a guitar master.)","Slang Terms, Vesre, Skill, Respect"\
"Trucho/a","SLANG (Slang - General)","Fake, fraudulent, counterfeit, low quality. Origin: From Spanish ""trucha"" (trout; astute person), re-signified in Lunfardo. Example: ""Este reloj es trucho, no es original."" (This watch is fake, it's not original.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo"\
"Vento","SLANG (Slang - General)","Money (Lunfardo, literally ""wind""). Example: ""No tengo vento para eso."" (I don't have money for that.)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, Money"\
"Yeca","SLANG (Slang - General)","Street. Origin: Vesre of Spanish ""calle"" (street). Status: Understood, but sounds somewhat dated or classic Lunfardo. Example: ""Lo encontr\'e9 en la yeca."" (I found him on the street.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, vesre, dated, classic lunfardo"\
"Yirar","SLANG (Slang - General)","To wander, to roam, especially in the context of prostitution (Lunfardo, from Italian ""girare"" - to turn, to wander). Example: ""La mina yiraba por el centro."" (The woman was working the streets downtown.)","Slang Terms, Lunfardo, Verb, Prostitution, Dated"\
"Yorugua","SLANG (Slang - General)","Uruguayan (Vesre of ""uruguayo""). Example: ""Mi vecino es yorugua."" (My neighbor is Uruguayan.)","Slang Terms, Vesre, Nationality"\
"Yuta","SLANG (Slang - General)","Police (often derogatory). Origin: Italian ""giusta"" (justice, referring to police). Status: Widely understood, often pejorative. Example: ""Cuidado que viene la yuta."" (Watch out, the cops are coming.)","Slang Terms, lunfardo, italian origin, derogatory, pejorative"\
"Zafar","SLANG (Slang - General)","To get out of a difficult situation, to narrowly escape, to get off the hook. Example: ""Zafamos de casualidad."" (We got away by sheer luck.)","Slang Terms, Verb, Escape, Luck"\
"Zapi","SLANG (Slang - General)","Pizza (Vesre of ""pizza""). Example: ""\'bfPedimos una zapi?"" (Shall we order a pizza?)","Slang Terms, Vesre, Food"\
"Zarpado/a","SLANG (Slang - General)","Intense, extreme; very good, awesome, cool; out of line, over the top (can be positive or negative). Context: Meaning depends heavily on context and intonation. Literally ""having gone too far, excessive."" Example (positive): ""La pel\'edcula estuvo zarpada."" (The movie was awesome.) Example (negative): ""Te zarpaste con ese comentario."" (You went too far with that comment.)","Slang Terms, context dependent, unique concept"\
"Ahre","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","(Often written as ""ahre"") Signals that the previous statement was a joke, ironic, an exaggeration, or not to be taken seriously. Similar to ""/s"" or ""jk"". Origin: Argentinian youth creation. Example: ""Soy el mejor jugador del mundo, ahre."" (I'm the best player in the world, ahre [joking].)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, internet culture, irony, sarcasm, joke"\
"Alto/a","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","(Intensifier) Very, great, a lot of. (Literally ""high, tall""). Example: ""\'a1Alta fiesta anoche!"" (Great party last night!)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, intensifier"\
"ATR","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","Acronym for ""A Todo Ritmo"" (At Full Rhythm/Pace). Means very active, energetic, enthusiastic. Example: ""Hoy salimos ATR."" (Tonight we're going out full energy.)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, acronym, energetic"\
"Cringe","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","Embarrassing, something that makes you feel awkward or uncomfortable (second-hand embarrassment). Origin: English loanword, global internet slang. Example: ""Ese video me dio mucho cringe."" (That video made me cringe a lot.)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, english loanword, internet slang"\
"De ruta","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","Awesome, excellent, cool (literally ""of route,"" implying something that takes you on a journey/is exceptional). Example: ""Esa banda es de ruta."" (That band is awesome.)","Youth Slang, Expression, Positive"\
"Dou","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","(Pronounced like ""dough"") An expression of surprise or agreement, similar to ""wow"" or ""for real?"". Popularized by internet culture/streamers. Example: ""\'97Me saqu\'e9 un 10. \'97\'a1Dou!"" (\'97I got a 10. \'97Wow!)","Youth Slang, Interjection, Surprise, Agreement, Internet Culture"\
"F","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","(Letter) Used to express condolences or acknowledge a misfortune, often humorously or laconically. Origin: Gaming culture (""Press F to pay respects""). Example: ""\'97Reprob\'e9 el examen. \'97F."" (\'97I failed the exam. \'97F.)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, gaming culture, internet slang, humorous"\
"Flashear","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","To imagine things, to be mistaken, to hallucinate; to talk nonsense, to invent things; to be surprised. Example: ""\'a1La re flasheaste, eso nunca pas\'f3!"" (You totally imagined that, that never happened!)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang"\
"Flashero/a","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","Trippy, mind-bending, surprising, or someone who imagines crazy things. Related to ""flash/flashear"". Example: ""La pel\'edcula fue re flashera."" (The movie was super trippy.) / ""Es un flashero, siempre inventa historias."" (He's a daydreamer/BS-er, always making up stories.)","Youth Slang, Slang Terms, surprising, imaginative"\
"Funar","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","To ""cancel"" someone, to publicly denounce or criticize someone, especially online. Origin: Internet slang, from Chilean Spanish, adopted by youth in Argentina. Example: ""Lo funaron en Twitter por sus comentarios."" (They ""cancelled"" him on Twitter for his comments.)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, internet slang, cancel culture, chilean spanish origin"\
"GOD","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","(Adjective) Excellent, amazing, top-tier. Origin: English loanword, internet/gaming slang. Example: ""Este tema nuevo es God."" (This new song is amazing.)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, english loanword, internet slang, gaming slang"\
"Limado/a (estar)","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","Crazy, nuts, eccentric; to be crazy. (Literally ""filed down""). Example: ""Ese tipo est\'e1 re limado."" (That guy is totally crazy.)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang"\
"Manija (estar)","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","To be very excited, anxious, or hyped up for something. (Literally ""handle""). Example: ""Estoy re manija por el concierto de ma\'f1ana."" (I'm super hyped for tomorrow's concert.)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang"\
"Messirve","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","(Playful coinage: ""me sirve"" + footballer Messi) It's useful to me / I like it / It works for me (often implying something is exceptionally good or perfectly suited). Example: ""\'97\'bfTe parece si vamos al cine? \'97Messirve."" (\'97How about we go to the movies? \'97That works perfectly for me.)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, coinage, cultural reference (Messi)"\
"Milipili","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","(Pejorative stereotype) A stereotypical superficial, wealthy young woman, often focused on appearances and social status. (Combination of common names Milagros and Pilar). Example: ""Las milipilis siempre est\'e1n en el shopping."" (The ""milipilis"" are always at the mall.)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, pejorative, stereotype"\
"Nashe","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","Very good, awesome, cool. Often used with an air of confidence or swagger. Origin: Youth slang, popularized by streamer Coscu. Origin unclear. Example: ""Esa jugada fue nashe."" (That play was awesome.)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, internet culture (Coscu)"\
"Ndeah","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","Similar to ""ahre,"" used to denote sarcasm or that something isn't serious. Often associated with a specific internet/meme culture.","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, internet culture, meme culture, sarcasm"\
"Ponerse/Sacarse la gorra","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","To get serious and start enforcing rules, to be a killjoy / To stop acting like an authority figure, to loosen up. (Literally ""to put on/take off the cap,"" like a police cap). Example: ""\'a1Dale, sacate la gorra y divertite!"" (Come on, loosen up and have fun!)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, idiom"\
"Previa","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","Pre-party, pre-game; a gathering (usually to drink alcohol) before going out to a main event. (Literally ""previous""). Example: ""Hacemos la previa en mi casa y despu\'e9s vamos al boliche."" (We'll pre-party at my place and then go to the club.)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang"\
"Re","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","(Intensifier) Very, really, super. Placed before an adjective or adverb. Example: ""Estoy re cansado."" (I'm super tired.) / ""La pasamos re bien."" (We had a really good time.)","Youth Slang, Slang Terms, Intensifier"\
"Salir de joda / Irse de joda","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","To go out partying, to go have fun (often involving drinking and dancing). Example: ""Los pibes se fueron de joda anoche."" (The kids went out partying last night.)","Youth Slang, Slang Terms, Idiom, Partying, Fun"\
"Skere","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","A term often used to express excitement or approval, similar to ""let's get it"" or ""cool."" Popularized by trap music. Example: ""\'a1Vamos a la joda! \'a1Skere!"" (Let's go to the party! Skere!)",""\
"Stalkear","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","To check someone's social media profiles extensively, often without their knowledge. Origin: English loanword (""to stalk""), adapted to Spanish verb. Example: ""Estuve stalkeando a mi ex en Instagram."" (I was stalking my ex on Instagram.)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, english loanword, internet culture"\
"Tincho","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","(Pejorative stereotype) A stereotypical superficial, wealthy young man, often into rugby, gyms, and showing off. Counterpart to ""milipili."" (Diminutive of Mart\'edn). Example: ""Ese bar est\'e1 lleno de tinchos."" (That bar is full of ""tinchos."")","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, pejorative, stereotype"\
"Wacho/a","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","Dude, guy/girl (can be affectionate among friends, but also pejorative for a mischievous or untrustworthy person, or orphan). Context is key. Example (friendly): ""\'bfQu\'e9 hac\'e9s, wacho?"" (What's up, dude?) Example (pejorative): ""Ese wacho me rob\'f3."" (That punk robbed me.)","Youth Slang, Slang Terms, Ambiguous, Affectionate, Pejorative"\
"Y la queso","YOUTH_SLANG (Youth Slang)","(Short for ""Y la que soporte"") And so what? Deal with it. It is what it is. (Literally ""And the cheese,"" but nonsensical). Origin: Recent youth slang, internet trend. Expresses defiance or acceptance. Example: ""S\'ed, llegu\'e9 tarde, y la queso."" (Yes, I arrived late, so what?)","Slang Terms, Youth Slang, internet trend, defiance"\
"Bondi","URBAN_SLANG (Urban Slang)","Bus (public transportation). Example: ""Tengo que tomar el bondi para ir al centro."" (I have to take the bus to go downtown.)",""\
"Laburo","URBAN_SLANG (Urban Slang)","Work, job. (From Italian ""lavoro""). Example: ""Ma\'f1ana tengo que ir al laburo temprano."" (Tomorrow I have to go to work early.)",""\
"Birra","URBAN_SLANG (Urban Slang)","Beer. (From Italian ""birra""). Example: ""\'bfTomamos unas birras despu\'e9s del laburo?"" (Shall we have some beers after work?)",""\
"Culiao/Culiada","REGIONAL_SLANG (Regional Slang)","(Primarily from C\'f3rdoba) A very versatile term, can be an insult (asshole), a term of endearment among friends, or just an emphatic interjection. Context is key. Example (emphatic): ""Hace un fr\'edo, culiao."" (It's damn cold.)",""\
"Rosarigasino / Gas\'f3","REGIONAL_SLANG (Regional Slang)","(Rosario) A language game from Rosario where ""-gas-"" is inserted after the stressed vowel, which is then repeated. Example: ""Amigo"" -> ""Amigasigo"". Not widely used currently but a known regionalism.","Regional Slang, Rosario, Language Game"\
"Salado/a","REGIONAL_SLANG (Regional Slang)","(Argentina/Uruguay) In Argentina, can mean ""expensive"" or ""difficult."" In Uruguay, it can mean ""great/amazing"" or ""terrible/difficult,"" depending on context. Example (Argentina - expensive): ""\'a1Qu\'e9 salado este restaurante!"" (This restaurant is so expensive!) Example (Argentina - difficult): ""El examen estuvo salado."" (The exam was tough.)","Regional Slang, Rioplatense, Ambiguous, Argentina, Uruguay"\
"Cringe","INTERNET_SLANG (Internet Slang)","(Borrowed from English) Something that causes embarrassment or awkwardness. Example: ""Ese video me dio mucho cringe."" (That video made me cringe a lot.)",""\
"Stalkear","INTERNET_SLANG (Internet Slang)","(Borrowed from English ""to stalk"") To check someone's social media profiles excessively. Example: ""Dej\'e1 de stalkear a tu ex."" (Stop stalking your ex.)",""\
"Hater","INTERNET_SLANG (Internet Slang)","(Borrowed from English) Someone who expresses negativity or criticism online. Example: ""No le hagas caso a los haters."" (Don't pay attention to the haters.)",""\
"Achicar (espacios)","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) To reduce space between defensive lines. (Metaphorical) To reduce options, put pressure on someone.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Aguantar la pelota","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) For a player to shield the ball under pressure. (Metaphorical) To hold one's ground, endure pressure.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Alargue","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) Extra time. (Metaphorical) An extension for anything.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Amague / Amagar","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) A feint or dummy move / To feint. (Metaphorical) A deceptive move or statement; to pretend.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Arco","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) Goal (structure and act of scoring). (Metaphorical) Objective, target.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Barra brava","JARGON (Jargon)","Organized group of hardcore, often violent, fans.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football"\
"Ca\'f1o","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) Nutmeg (ball through opponent's legs). (Metaphorical) A clever trick that embarrasses someone.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Chamuyo","JARGON (Jargon)","Smooth talk, sweet talk, often deceptive or used to persuade or flirt. Can also refer to idle chatter. Example: ""No le creas, es puro chamuyo."" (Don't believe him, it's all smooth talk.)",""\
"Cl\'e1sico","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) Derby match between rivals. (Metaphorical) Any classic rivalry.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Colgarse del travesa\'f1o","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) To play extremely defensively. (Metaphorical) To be overly cautious, not take risks.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Cortita y al pie","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) A short, simple, precise pass. (Metaphorical) Direct, concise, to the point.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Dame Bola","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) Pass me the ball. (Metaphorical) Pay attention to me!","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Gambeta / Gambetear","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) Dribble / To dribble. (Metaphorical) To skillfully evade a difficult situation or question.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Gol en contra","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) Own goal. (Metaphorical) An action that inadvertently harms oneself.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Habilitar","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) To make a pass that leaves a teammate in a good scoring position. (Metaphorical) To enable or authorize.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Morf\'f3n/a","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) A selfish player who doesn't pass. (Metaphorical) A selfish person in any context.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical, pejorative"\
"Palomita","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) Diving header.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football"\
"Paquete","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football, Pejorative) A very bad, clumsy player. (Metaphorical) Incompetent person.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, pejorative, metaphorical"\
"Patadura","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football, Pejorative) A clumsy or unskilled football player (literally ""hard foot"").","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, pejorative"\
"Pecho fr\'edo","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football, Pejorative) A player lacking passion or courage. (Metaphorical) An emotionless person in challenges. (Also listed under Pejorative Language)","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, pejorative, metaphorical"\
"Picado","JARGON (Jargon)","An informal, friendly football match. (Metaphorical) Any informal competitive activity.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Ponerse la 10","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) To wear the #10 jersey (best player). (Metaphorical) To take responsibility, perform exceptionally, lead by example.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Puntero","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) Winger; leading team in a league.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football"\
"Semillero","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) Youth academy. (Metaphorical) Any source or breeding ground for talent.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Taquito","JARGON (Jargon)","(Football) Backheel pass or shot. (Metaphorical) A clever, subtle move.","Football (Soccer) Lingo, football, metaphorical"\
"Yuta","JARGON (Jargon)","(Often derogatory) Police. Example: ""Ah\'ed viene la yuta."" (Here come the cops.)",""\
"A la bartola","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","Carelessly, negligently, without effort or concern. Example: ""Hizo el trabajo a la bartola y qued\'f3 mal."" (He did the job carelessly and it turned out badly.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases"\
"Al cuete / Al divino bot\'f3n","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","In vain, uselessly, for no reason, for nothing. (""Al cuete"" is more common). Example: ""Estudi\'e9 toda la noche, pero fue al cuete, el examen era f\'e1cil."" (I studied all night, but it was for nothing, the exam was easy.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases"\
"Andar como turco en la neblina","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To be completely lost or disoriented. (Literally ""to go like a Turk in the mist""). Example: ""Sin el mapa, and\'e1bamos como turco en la neblina."" (Without the map, we were completely lost.)","Idiom, Figurative Expression, Lost, Disoriented"\
"Buscarle la quinta pata al gato","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To look for trouble where there is none; to overcomplicate things unnecessarily. (Literally ""to look for the cat's fifth leg""). Example: ""No le busques la quinta pata al gato, la soluci\'f3n es simple."" (Don't overcomplicate it, the solution is simple.)","Idiom, Figurative Expression, Overcomplication"\
"Dejar/Quedar colgado/a","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To be left hanging, stood up; to be flaky or forgetful. Example: ""Me dej\'f3 colgado, nunca lleg\'f3 a la cita."" (He stood me up, he never arrived for the date.) / ""Me colgu\'e9 y me olvid\'e9 de llamarte."" (I got sidetracked/flaked and forgot to call you.)","Idiom, Social, Forgetful"\
"De una","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","For sure, definitely, absolutely. Example: ""\'bfVamos al cine?"" ""\'a1De una!"" (""Shall we go to the movies?"" ""Definitely!"")","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases"\
"Del a\'f1o del \'f1aupa","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","Very old, ancient, from a bygone era. Origin: ""\'d1aupa"" from Quechua meaning ""old"" or ""ancient."" Example: ""Esa costumbre es del a\'f1o del \'f1aupa."" (That custom is from ages ago.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Figurative Expressions, quechua origin"\
"En la loma del orto","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","(Vulgar) Very far away, in the middle of nowhere. (Literally ""on the hill of the ass""). Example: ""El pueblo queda en la loma del orto."" (The town is in the middle of nowhere.)","Idiom, Vulgar, Distance, Location"\
"Estar al horno (con papas)","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To be in trouble, to be in a very difficult situation (""to be in the oven (with potatoes)""). Example: ""Si no entrego el informe ma\'f1ana, estoy al horno."" (If I don't deliver the report tomorrow, I'm toast.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Figurative Expressions"\
"Estar al pedo","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","(Vulgar) To have nothing to do, to be idle, to be useless. Example: ""Hoy no tengo nada que hacer, estoy al pedo."" (I have nothing to do today, I'm just idling.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases, vulgar"\
"Estar hasta las manos","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To be very busy; to be deeply in love or involved with someone/something. (Literally ""to be up to the hands""). Example (busy): ""No puedo salir, estoy hasta las manos con el laburo."" (I can't go out, I'm swamped with work.) Example (in love): ""Est\'e1 hasta las manos con esa mina."" (He's head over heels for that girl.)","Idiom, Figurative Expression, Busy, In Love"\
"Estar en Babia","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To be daydreaming, distracted, not paying attention, out of it. (Also used in general Spanish). Origin: Babia is a region in Spain, historically associated with distraction. Example: ""El alumno estaba en Babia durante toda la clase."" (The student was daydreaming throughout the whole class.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Figurative Expressions, general spanish usage"\
"Estar en pedo","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","(Vulgar) To be drunk. Example: ""No le hagas caso, est\'e1 en pedo."" (Don't listen to him, he's drunk.)","Idiom, Vulgar, State (drunk)"\
"Estar en una / Estar en la suya","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To be distracted, in one's own world, or not paying attention. ""Estar en una"" can also mean to be going through something or to be focused on a particular (often unspecified) thing. Example: ""No me escuch\'f3, estaba en la suya."" (He didn't hear me, he was in his own world.)",""\
"Estar hecho percha","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To be exhausted, worn out, shattered. (Literally ""to be made into a clothes hanger""). Example: ""Despu\'e9s del partido, estaba hecho percha."" (After the game, I was exhausted.)","Slang Terms, idiom"\
"Estar pip\'ed cuc\'fa","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To be excellent, perfect, impeccable, top-notch. Context: Often has a slightly charming or quaint feel. Example: ""El hotel estaba pip\'ed cuc\'fa, todo impecable."" (The hotel was top-notch, everything impeccable.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Figurative Expressions, quaint"\
"Hacer algo de cayetano","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To do something silently, secretly, or without telling anyone. Example: ""Se comi\'f3 el chocolate de cayetano."" (He ate the chocolate secretly.)","Idiom, Secretly, Stealthily"\
"Hacer la gamba","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To do a favor, to help someone out. (""Gamba"" can mean leg, but also 100 pesos in older slang). Example: ""\'bfMe hac\'e9s la gamba y me llev\'e1s al centro?"" (Can you do me a favor and take me downtown?)","Idiom, Favor, Help"\
"Hacerse la rata","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To play truant, to skip school or work. (Literally ""to make oneself the rat""). Example: ""Hoy no voy a la escuela, me voy a hacer la rata."" (I'm not going to school today, I'm going to play truant.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases"\
"Ir a llorarle/cobrarle a Magoya","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To go complain to someone who won't listen or help; to try to get something from someone who doesn't exist or won't pay. (Magoya is a mythical figure who never helps). Example: ""Si no te pagan, and\'e1 a cobrarle a Magoya."" (If they don't pay you, go try getting it from Magoya / you're out of luck.)","Idiom, Figurative Expression, Futility, Complaint"\
"Ir a los bifes","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To get to the point, to get down to business. (Literally ""to go to the steaks""). Example: ""Bueno, vamos a los bifes, \'bfcu\'e1l es el problema?"" (Okay, let's get to the point, what's the problem?)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Figurative Expressions"\
"Irse/Mandar a fre\'edr churros","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To tell someone to get lost, to go to hell; to dismiss someone contemptuously. Example: ""Me cans\'f3 con sus quejas, lo mand\'e9 a fre\'edr churros."" (I got tired of his complaints, I told him to get lost.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases"\
"La posta","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","The truth, the real deal. Example: ""Te digo la posta, es as\'ed."" (I'm telling you the truth, that's how it is.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases, (also SLANG)"\
"Levantarse a alguien","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To pick someone up, to successfully flirt with someone. Example: ""\'bfViste? Se levant\'f3 a la chica m\'e1s linda de la fiesta."" (Did you see? He picked up the prettiest girl at the party.)","Idiom, Flirting, Social"\
"Mandar fruta","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To talk nonsense, to BS, to make things up. (Literally ""to send fruit""). Example: ""No le creas, est\'e1 mandando fruta."" (Don't believe him, he's talking nonsense.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Figurative Expressions"\
"M\'e1s vieja que la escarapela","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","Very old. (The ""escarapela"" is a national cockade, a historical symbol). Example: ""Esa radio es m\'e1s vieja que la escarapela."" (That radio is older than the hills.)","Idiom, Figurative Expression, Age, Cultural Reference"\
"Me cortaron las piernas","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","""They cut my legs off!"" - An expression of being severely hampered, debilitated, or having one's hopes dashed. Famously used by Maradona. Example: ""Cuando me sacaron del proyecto, sent\'ed que me cortaron las piernas."" (When they took me off the project, I felt like they cut my legs off.)","Idiom, Figurative Expression, Setback, Sports Reference"\
"Me caigo y me levanto","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","Expression of annoyance, resignation when something frustrating happens. (Literally ""I fall and I get up""). Example: ""Otra vez subi\'f3 el d\'f3lar... me caigo y me levanto."" (The dollar went up again... here we go again.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases, expression"\
"Me escupieron el asado","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","They ruined my plans, they screwed me over. (Literally ""they spat on my barbecue""). Example: ""Ten\'eda todo listo para las vacaciones y me cancelaron el vuelo, \'a1me escupieron el asado!"" (I had everything ready for vacation and they cancelled my flight, they totally ruined it for me!)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases"\
"\'bfMe est\'e1s cargando? / \'bfMe carg\'e1s?","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","Are you kidding me? Are you pulling my leg? (Literally ""Are you loading me?""). Example: ""\'97Dice que vio un OVNI. \'97\'bfMe est\'e1s cargando?"" (\'97He says he saw a UFO. \'97Are you kidding me?)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases, question"\
"Me mataste","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","You killed me (Figuratively: I have no idea, I don't know the answer). Example: ""\'97\'bfSab\'e9s cu\'e1nto cuesta esto? \'97Uf, me mataste."" (\'97Do you know how much this costs? \'97Ugh, you got me/I have no idea.)","Idiom, Expression, No Idea"\
"Me pinta / \'bfTe pinta?","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","I'm in the mood for it, I feel like it / Are you in the mood for it?, Do you feel like it? Example: ""\'bfVamos al cine? \'97 Dale, me pinta."" (Shall we go to the movies? \'97 Sure, I'm in the mood.)","Idiom, Expression, Desire, Agreement"\
"Me tomo el palo / Tomate el palo","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","I'm leaving, I'm outta here / Get out of here, beat it! Example: ""Esto es un aburrimiento, me tomo el palo."" (This is boring, I'm leaving.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases, (also SLANG)"\
"Moverte que te va a mear un perro","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","Get a move on! Stop standing around! (Literally ""Move it, or a dog will pee on you""). Example: ""Dale, apurate, \'a1movete que te va a mear un perro!"" (Come on, hurry up, get a move on!)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases"\
"Ni en pedo","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","(Vulgar) No way, absolutely not, not even if I were drunk. Example: ""\'bfPrestarle plata a \'e9l? Ni en pedo."" (Lend him money? No way.)","Idiom, Expression, Refusal, Vulgar"\
"Ni idea","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","No idea. Example: ""\'bfD\'f3nde est\'e1 Juan?"" ""Ni idea."" (""Where is Juan?"" ""No idea."")","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases"\
"No da","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","It's not appropriate, it's not right, it doesn't work, it's not cool. (Literally ""it doesn't give""). Example: ""Ir as\'ed vestido a la entrevista, no da."" (Going dressed like that to the interview is not appropriate.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases"\
"No dar bola","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To ignore someone, not pay attention to someone. (Literally ""not to give ball""). Example: ""Le habl\'e9 pero no me dio bola."" (I spoke to him but he ignored me.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Figurative Expressions"\
"No hay tu t\'eda","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","There's no way, it's impossible, no solution. (Corruption of ""no hay atut\'eda"" - atut\'eda was an old remedy). Example: ""Intent\'e9 arreglarlo, pero no hay tu t\'eda."" (I tried to fix it, but there's no way.)","Idiom, Figurative Expression, Impossibility, No Solution"\
"No levantar la perdiz","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","Don't arouse suspicion, don't spill the beans, keep it quiet. (Literally ""don't flush out the partridge""). Example: ""Estamos preparando una sorpresa, as\'ed que no levantes la perdiz."" (We're preparing a surprise, so don't spill the beans.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Figurative Expressions"\
"No tener dos dedos de frente","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To not be very smart, to be clueless. (Literally ""to not have two fingers of forehead""). Example: ""Ese tipo no tiene dos dedos de frente."" (That guy is clueless.)",""\
"Pegar un tubazo","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To make a phone call. (Literally ""to hit with a tube,"" referring to old phone receivers). Example: ""Pegame un tubazo cuando llegues."" (Call me when you arrive.)","Idiom, Communication, Phone Call, Dated"\
"Ponerse la gorra","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To become strict, to act like an authority figure, to be a killjoy. (Literally ""to put on the cap,"" like a police cap). Example: ""Est\'e1bamos divirti\'e9ndonos hasta que el vecino se puso la gorra."" (We were having fun until the neighbor got all strict.)","Idiom, Behavior, Authority, Killjoy"\
"Ponerse las pilas","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To get your act together, to get energized, to start working seriously. (Literally ""to put in your batteries""). Example: ""Dale, ponete las pilas que tenemos que terminar esto."" (Come on, get moving, we have to finish this.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Figurative Expressions"\
"Remar en dulce de leche","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To do something very difficult or that takes a lot of effort (Literally ""to row in dulce de leche""). Example: ""Conseguir ese permiso fue remar en dulce de leche."" (Getting that permit was like rowing in dulce de leche.)","Idiom, Figurative Expression, Difficulty"\
"Ser Gardel","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To be the best, to be on top of the world, to be self-sufficient and privileged (like Carlos Gardel). Example: ""Con ese auto nuevo, se siente Gardel."" (With that new car, he feels like he's on top of the world.)","Idiom, Figurative Expression, Excellence, Cultural Reference"\
"Ser mala leche","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To be mean, to have bad intentions. (Literally ""to be bad milk""). Example: ""Ese comentario fue muy mala leche."" (That comment was very mean-spirited.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Figurative Expressions"\
"Tener mala leche","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To have bad luck. (Literally ""to have bad milk""). Example: ""Perd\'ed la billetera, \'a1qu\'e9 mala leche!"" (I lost my wallet, what bad luck!)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Figurative Expressions"\
"Tenerla clara","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To know something very well, to be an expert, to have a clear understanding or plan. (Literally ""to have it clear""). Example: ""\'c9l la tiene clara en computaci\'f3n, preguntale."" (He knows a lot about computers, ask him.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Figurative Expressions"\
"Tirar la chancleta","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To let loose, to behave without inhibitions, especially after a period of restraint. (Literally ""to throw the slipper""). Example: ""En la fiesta, tir\'f3 la chancleta y bail\'f3 toda la noche."" (At the party, she let loose and danced all night.)",""\
"Tirar los galgos","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To flirt with someone, to hit on someone. (Literally ""to release the greyhounds""). Example: ""Le estuvo tirando los galgos toda la noche."" (He was hitting on her all night.)","Idiom, Flirting, Social"\
"Tomarse el palo","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To leave, to take off, often suddenly. (Literally ""to take the stick/pole""). Example: ""Me cans\'e9, me tomo el palo."" (I'm tired, I'm outta here.)","Slang Terms, idiom"\
"Tom\'e1rselo con soda","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","To take it easy, to calm down. (Literally ""to take it with soda water,"" implying dilution). Example: ""Tranquilo, tom\'e1telo con soda."" (Relax, take it easy.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Figurative Expressions"\
"Ya fue","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","Forget it, it's over, it doesn't matter anymore. Example: ""Quer\'eda ir, pero ya fue, es muy tarde."" (I wanted to go, but forget it, it's too late.)","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases"\
"Yo, argentino","IDIOM (Idiom / Phrase)","(Self-referential, often ironic) ""I, Argentinian"" - used when someone acts according to a perceived Argentinian stereotype. Example: ""Cuando vio el problema, dijo 'no te met\'e1s' y sigui\'f3 de largo. T\'edpico: 'Yo, argentino'."" (When he saw the problem, he said ""don't get involved"" and walked on by. Typical: ""I, Argentinian."")","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases, self-referential, ironic, stereotype"\
"A caballo regalado no se le miran los dientes","PROVERB (Proverb / Saying)","Don't look a gift horse in the mouth. (Meaning: Don't be critical of a gift.)",""\
"Cada uno habla de la feria seg\'fan le va en ella","PROVERB (Proverb / Saying)","People judge things based on their own experiences. (Literally ""Everyone speaks of the fair according to how it went for them."")","Proverb, Perspective, Experience"\
"Calavera no chilla","PROVERB (Proverb / Saying)","(Literally ""skull doesn't scream/complain"") Similar to ""you've made your bed, now lie in it."" Used when someone faces consequences of their own risky behavior.","Proverbs & Sayings, Local Sayings"\
"Donde comen dos, comen tres","PROVERB (Proverb / Saying)","There's always room for one more (especially for a meal). (Literally ""Where two eat, three eat."")","Proverb, Hospitality, Sharing"\
"M\'e1s loco que una cabra con pollitos","PROVERB (Proverb / Saying)","Crazier than a goat with chicks. (Very crazy/eccentric).","Proverbs & Sayings, Local Sayings, simile"\
"M\'e1s vale p\'e1jaro en mano que cien volando","PROVERB (Proverb / Saying)","A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush. (Meaning: It's better to hold onto something you have rather than risk losing it by trying to get something better.)",""\
"No por mucho madrugar amanece m\'e1s temprano","PROVERB (Proverb / Saying)","Some things take their natural course and can't be rushed. (Literally ""Waking up very early doesn't make the sun rise sooner."")","Proverb, Patience, Natural Course"\
"Argento","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative when implying negative stereotypes) Argentinian (e.g., know-it-all, lazy, ""no te met\'e1s"" - don't get involved). Severity: Mild to Moderate.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, stereotype, mild to moderate"\
"Atorrante","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative) Vagrant, lazy person; shameless, brazen person; scoundrel. Severity: Moderate to Strong. (Also listed under Lunfardo/SLANG)","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, moderate to strong, (also lunfardo)"\
"Babieca","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative, from Santa Fe province) Unintelligent person, simpleton. Severity: Moderate.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, regional (Santa Fe), moderate"\
"Bagayo","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative for people) Ugly person. Severity: Moderate to Strong. (Also listed under General Slang for things)","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, moderate to strong"\
"Boludo/Boluda","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative) Idiot, fool, jerk. (See also General Slang for familiar use). Severity: Variable: Mild (among close friends as banter) to Strong (as an insult).","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, variable severity, (also slang)"\
"Careta","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative) Hypocrite, fake person, phony. Severity: Moderate to Strong. (Also listed under General Slang)","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, moderate to strong, (also slang)"\
"Chab\'f3n/a","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Can be pejorative if used dismissively or contemptuously). Severity: Mild (as an insult). (Also listed under General Slang)","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, potentially pejorative, mild, (also slang)"\
"Chancho/a","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative in specific context) Public transport inspector. (Literally ""pig""). Severity: Moderate.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, specific context, moderate"\
"Cheto/a","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative) Snob, posh person; someone ostentatiously displaying wealth or status. Severity: Moderate to Strong.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, moderate to strong"\
"Chorro/a","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative) Thief, robber. (Literally ""spurt, jet""). Severity: Strong.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, strong"\
"Cobani","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative) Police officer. (Vesre of ""bot\'f3n"" or from Italian ""sbirro""). Severity: Moderate.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, vesre, italian origin, moderate"\
"Forro/Forra","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Vulgar, Pejorative) Asshole, bastard, a bad or selfish person who uses others. (Literally ""lining; condom""). Severity: Strong, vulgar.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, vulgar, pejorative, strong"\
"Gil/a","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative) Fool, idiot, naive person, sucker. Severity: Moderate to Strong.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, moderate to strong"\
"Guacho/a","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative as insult) Bastard, son of a bitch. (Literally ""orphan; illegitimate child""). Severity: Strong.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, strong"\
"Guarango/a","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative) Rude, vulgar, ill-mannered person; coarse or obscene language/behavior. Severity: Moderate to Strong.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, vulgar, moderate to strong"\
"Logi","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative) Fool, idiot (same as ""gil""). (Vesre of ""gil""). Severity: Moderate to Strong. Youth slang.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, vesre, moderate to strong, youth slang"\
"Nabo/a","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative) Idiot, fool, clueless person. (Literally ""turnip""). Severity: Moderate.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, moderate"\
"Naso","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative when mocking) Big nose. (From Italian ""naso"" - nose). Severity: Mild to Moderate.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, italian origin, mild to moderate"\
"No le llega agua al tanque","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative idiom) He/she isn't smart, is slow-witted. (Literally ""Water doesn't reach his/her water tank""). Severity: Moderate.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, idiom, moderate"\
"Pecho fr\'edo","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative, esp. in sports) Emotionless or passionless person, lacking fighting spirit. (Literally ""cold chest""). Severity: Moderate.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, sports, moderate"\
"Pelotudo/Pelotuda","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Vulgar, Pejorative) Idiot, moron, asshole (stronger and more offensive than ""boludo""). Severity: Strong to Very Strong, vulgar.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, vulgar, pejorative, strong to very strong"\
"Pendejo/a","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative for older individuals acting immaturely) Immature adolescent/young adult. (Neutral for children: kid). Severity: Moderate to Strong (for immature adults).","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, moderate to strong"\
"Rati","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative) Police officer. (Shortening/corruption of ""rata"" - rat, or other terms). Severity: Moderate.","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, moderate"\
"Trucho/a","INSULT (Insult / Banter)","(Pejorative for people) A deceitful person. Severity: Moderate. (Also listed under General Slang for things)","Pejorative Language & Playful Insults, pejorative, moderate, (also slang)"\
"Un gallego entra a una farmacia: - \'bfTiene pastillas para la tonter\'eda? - \'a1Pero hombre! \'a1Si eso no existe! - \'a1Qu\'e9 suerte! \'a1Justo se me acabaron!","JOKE (Joke)","A Galician (Spaniard, often stereotyped as simpletons in jokes) enters a pharmacy: - Do you have pills for foolishness? - But man! That doesn't exist! - How lucky! I just ran out!","Joke, Stereotype (Gallego), Humour"\
"\'bfA d\'f3nde van los gatos cuando se mueren? - PurGATOrio.","JOKE (Joke)","Where do cats go when they die? - PurGATOry (purgatorio + gato).","Joke, Wordplay, Pun, Animals, Religion"\
"\'bfC\'f3mo se llama un boomerang que no vuelve? - Un palo.","JOKE (Joke)","What do you call a boomerang that doesn't come back? - A stick.","Joke, Simple"\
"\'bfC\'f3mo se queda un mago despu\'e9s de comer? - Magordito.","JOKE (Joke)","What happens to a magician after eating? - He gets chubby (mago + gordito).","Joke, Wordplay, Pun"\
"\'bfCu\'e1l es el animal m\'e1s antiguo? - La cebra, porque est\'e1 en blanco y negro.","JOKE (Joke)","What's the oldest animal? - The zebra, because it's in black and white (like old photos/TV).","Joke, Pun, Animals"\
"\'bfCu\'e1l es el colmo de Aladd\'edn? - Tener mal genio.","JOKE (Joke)","What's the ultimate irony/problem for Aladdin? - To have a bad temper (mal genio) / a bad genie (genio).","Joke, Wordplay, Pun, Cultural Reference"\
"\'bfCu\'e1l es la fruta mas paciente? - Es pera.","JOKE (Joke)","Which fruit is the most patient? - It's a pear (espera = wait).","Joke, Wordplay, Pun, Food"\
"\'bfCu\'e1l es la fruta m\'e1s divertida? - La naranja ja ja ja ja.","JOKE (Joke)","Which fruit is the most fun? - The orange (naranja, with ""ja ja ja"" mimicking laughter).","Joke, Wordplay, Pun, Food"\
"\'bfCu\'e1l es el vino m\'e1s amargo? - Vino mi suegra.","JOKE (Joke)","What is the most bitter wine? - My mother-in-law came (vino mi suegra; ""vino"" is wine and also ""came"").","Joke, Wordplay, Pun, Family, Humor"\
"\'bfPor qu\'e9 el caf\'e9 fue a la escuela? - Porque quer\'eda ser m\'e1s fuerte.","JOKE (Joke)","Why did the coffee go to school? - Because it wanted to be stronger (fuerte can mean strong in flavor or physically strong).","Joke, Pun, Food"\
"\'bfPor qu\'e9 los p\'e1jaros no usan Facebook? - Porque ya tienen Twitter.","JOKE (Joke)","Why don't birds use Facebook? - Because they already have Twitter (plays on ""tweet"").","Joke, Pun, Animals, Technology"\
"\'bfPor qu\'e9 se fue el tamal al hospital? - Porque 'ta malito.","JOKE (Joke)","Why did the tamal go to the hospital? - Because it was sick ('ta malito = est\'e1 malito).","Joke, Wordplay, Pun, Food"\
"\'bfQu\'e9 hace una abeja en el gimnasio? - \'a1Zum-ba!","JOKE (Joke)","What does a bee do in the gym? - Zumba! (Plays on ""zumba"" exercise and ""zumbar"" - to buzz).","Joke, Wordplay, Pun, Animals"\
"\'bfQu\'e9 le dice un techo a otro? - Techo de menos.","JOKE (Joke)","What does one roof say to another? - I miss you (plays on ""techo de menos"" sounding like ""te echo de menos"" - I miss you).","Joke, Wordplay, Pun"\
"\'bfQu\'e9 le dice una iguana a su hermana gemela? - Somos iguanitas.","JOKE (Joke)","What does one iguana say to her twin sister? - We are identical little iguanas (iguanitas also sounds like ""igualitas"" - identical little ones).","Joke, Wordplay, Pun, Animals"\
"\'bfQu\'e9 le dijo el sem\'e1foro al coche? - No me mires, me estoy cambiando.","JOKE (Joke)","What did the traffic light say to the car? - Don't look at me, I'm changing (colors).","Joke, Personification"\
"\'bfQu\'e9 le dijo una piedra a otra? - \'a1La vida es dura!","JOKE (Joke)","What did one rock say to another? - Life is hard! (Dura means hard, both physically and metaphorically).","Joke, Pun"\
"\'bfQu\'e9 te pasa, calabaza? - Nada, nada, limonada.","JOKE (Joke)","What's up, pumpkin? - Nothing, nothing, lemonade. A playful, rhyming exchange.","Joke, Rhyme, Greeting_Response, Playful"\
"\'bfQu\'e9 dice una taza a otra taza? - \'bfQu\'e9 taza ciendo?","JOKE (Joke)","What does one cup say to another cup? - What are you doing? (qu\'e9 taza ciendo sounds like ""qu\'e9 est\'e1s haciendo"").","Joke, Wordplay, Pun, Objects"\
"Obvio, microbio.","JOKE (Joke)","Obviously, microbe. A rhyming, dismissive way to respond when someone states the obvious. Example: ""\'97El sol sale por el este. \'97Obvio, microbio.""","Joke, Rhyme, Sarcasm, Filler_Response"\
"Chao, chao, bacalao.","WORDPLAY (Wordplay / Pun)","Bye bye, codfish. A playful, rhyming way to say goodbye. Example: ""Bueno, me voy. \'a1Chao, chao, bacalao!""","Wordplay, Rhyme, Farewell"\
"Eso, eso, pan con queso.","WORDPLAY (Wordplay / Pun)","That, that, bread with cheese. A rhyming way to express agreement. Example: ""\'97Creo que deber\'edamos irnos. \'97Eso, eso, pan con queso.""","Wordplay, Rhyme, Agreement"\
"Me canso ganso.","WORDPLAY (Wordplay / Pun)","I'm tired, goose. A rhyming phrase to express tiredness playfully. Example: ""Despu\'e9s de tanto trabajar, me canso ganso.""","Wordplay, Rhyme, Expression"\
"Camar\'f3n, caramelo. Caramelo, camar\'f3n.","TONGUE_TWISTER (Tongue Twister)","Shrimp, caramel. Caramel, shrimp.","Tongue Twister, Simple, Repetition"\
"Erre con erre cigarro, erre con erre barril. R\'e1pido corren los carros, cargados de az\'facar del ferrocarril.","TONGUE_TWISTER (Tongue Twister)","R with R cigar, R with R barrel. Quickly run the carts, loaded with sugar from the railway. (Focuses on the ""rr"" sound).","Tongue Twister, Sound Practice (rr)"\
"Juan junta juncos junto a la zanja.","TONGUE_TWISTER (Tongue Twister)","Juan gathers reeds next to the ditch.","Tongue Twister, Alliteration"\
"Pancha plancha con cuatro planchas. \'bfCon cu\'e1ntas planchas Pancha plancha?","TONGUE_TWISTER (Tongue Twister)","Pancha irons with four irons. With how many irons does Pancha iron?","Tongue Twister, Alliteration"\
"Pap\'e1 pone pan para Pep\'edn. Para Pep\'edn pone pan pap\'e1.","TONGUE_TWISTER (Tongue Twister)","Dad puts bread for Pepin. For Pepin dad puts bread.","Tongue Twister, Alliteration, Repetition"\
"Pepe Pecas pica papas con un pico. Con un pico pica papas Pepe Pecas.","TONGUE_TWISTER (Tongue Twister)","Pepe Pecas pecks potatoes with a pick. With a pick Pepe Pecas pecks potatoes.","Tongue Twister, Alliteration"\
"Tres tristes tigres tragaban trigo en un trigal. En un trigal, tres tristes tigres tragaban trigo.","TONGUE_TWISTER (Tongue Twister)","Three sad tigers were eating wheat in a wheat field. In a wheat field, three sad tigers were eating wheat.","Tongue Twister, Classic"\
"Bueno...","FILLER_WORD (Filler Word / Interjection)","""Well..."" or ""Okay..."" used to transition, hesitate, or introduce a statement.","Filler Words & Interjections, Pausing/Hesitation/Emotion Conveyors, transition, hesitation"\
"Che","FILLER_WORD (Filler Word / Interjection)","(Also a general slang term and term of address) Can be used as a filler, similar to ""hey"" or ""well."" (Note: This is a second entry for Che, focusing on its filler role. Primary entry under SLANG.)","Filler Words & Interjections, Pausing/Hesitation/Emotion Conveyors, slang, address term"\
"Dale","FILLER_WORD (Filler Word / Interjection)","""Okay,"" ""Go ahead,"" ""Come on."" (Very versatile, can also be an exclamation). (Note: Also an exclamation)","Filler Words & Interjections, Pausing/Hesitation/Emotion Conveyors, versatile, exclamation"\
"Este...","FILLER_WORD (Filler Word / Interjection)","""Um..."" or ""uh..."" used when hesitating or thinking.","Filler Words & Interjections, Pausing/Hesitation/Emotion Conveyors, hesitation"\
"LPM (La puta madre)","FILLER_WORD (Filler Word / Interjection)","(Vulgar) ""Damn it!,"" ""For fuck's sake!"" (Exclamation of anger, frustration, surprise, or emphasis). Context: Can alleviate anger humorously or express strong emotion.","Filler Words & Interjections, Exclamations, vulgar, anger, frustration, surprise, emphasis"\
"\'a1Mir\'e1 vos!","FILLER_WORD (Filler Word / Interjection)","""Look at that!"", ""Well, I never!"", ""Fancy that!"" (Expressing surprise or interest).","Filler Words & Interjections, Exclamations, surprise, interest"\
"O sea","FILLER_WORD (Filler Word / Interjection)","""I mean..."" or ""In other words..."" used for clarification.","Filler Words & Interjections, Pausing/Hesitation/Emotion Conveyors, clarification"\
"\'a1Qu\'e9 baj\'f3n!","FILLER_WORD (Filler Word / Interjection)","What a bummer! How disappointing!","Idioms & Colloquial Phrases, Common Informal Phrases, exclamation"\
"\'a1Qu\'e9 b\'e1rbaro!","FILLER_WORD (Filler Word / Interjection)","""Awesome!"", ""Fantastic!"", ""Amazing!"" (Can also mean ""how awful!"" depending on context and tone, but more often positive).","Filler Words & Interjections, Exclamations, context dependent"\
"Tipo...","FILLER_WORD (Filler Word / Interjection)","Like..., Sort of... Used as a filler when hesitating or explaining. Example: ""Y, tipo, no sab\'eda qu\'e9 decirle."" (And, like, I didn't know what to say to him.)","Filler Word, Hesitation"\
"\'a1Uh! / \'a1Uy!","FILLER_WORD (Filler Word / Interjection)","""Oops!"", ""Oh!"" (Expressing surprise, mild pain, or realizing a mistake).","Filler Words & Interjections, Exclamations, surprise, pain, mistake"\
"Viste","FILLER_WORD (Filler Word / Interjection)","""You know?"" or ""See?"" Often used at the end of sentences to check for understanding or agreement.","Filler Words & Interjections, Pausing/Hesitation/Emotion Conveyors, agreement"\
"\'a1Dale!","FILLER_WORD (Filler Word / Interjection)","""Come on!"", ""Let's go!"", ""Okay!"" (Note: Also a versatile filler)","Filler Words & Interjections, Exclamations, (also filler)"\
"Cole","SHORTCUT (Shortcut / Reduction)","Short for ""colegio"" (school).","Conversational Shortcuts & Reductions, Abbreviations & Acronyms"\
"Facu","SHORTCUT (Shortcut / Reduction)","Short for ""facultad"" (university faculty/college).","Conversational Shortcuts & Reductions, Abbreviations & Acronyms"\
"Finde","SHORTCUT (Shortcut / Reduction)","Short for ""fin de semana"" (weekend). Example: ""\'bfQu\'e9 hac\'e9s este finde?"" (What are you doing this weekend?)","Conversational Shortcuts & Reductions, Contracted Forms"\
"LPM","SHORTCUT (Shortcut / Reduction)","Short for ""La puta madre"" (strong expletive). (Also listed as an Exclamation)","Conversational Shortcuts & Reductions, Abbreviations & Acronyms, vulgar, expletive"\
"Pa'","SHORTCUT (Shortcut / Reduction)","Short for ""para"" (for, to). Example: ""Voy pa'lla."" (Voy para all\'e1 - I'm going over there.)","Conversational Shortcuts & Reductions, Contracted Forms"\
"Porfa","SHORTCUT (Shortcut / Reduction)","Short for ""por favor"" (please).","Conversational Shortcuts & Reductions, Abbreviations & Acronyms"\
"Bronca","UNIQUE_CONCEPT (Unique Concept / Word)","A feeling of anger, frustration, resentment, or powerlessness, often mixed with sadness. Example: ""Me da bronca que no se haga justicia."" (It makes me angry/frustrated that there's no justice.)",""\
"Chamuyo/Chamuyar","UNIQUE_CONCEPT (Unique Concept / Word)","The act of sweet-talking, smooth-talking, flirting, or trying to persuade someone with charming but possibly insincere words. A ""chamuyero"" is someone skilled at this. It's an art of verbal seduction or persuasion beyond simple lying. (Also listed under Lunfardo/SLANG)","Unique Local Words/Concepts (Lacking Direct Translation), (also lunfardo, slang)"\
"Fiaca","UNIQUE_CONCEPT (Unique Concept / Word)","More than just ""laziness,"" it describes a specific state of languor, a lack of motivation or energy, often accepted with a certain resignation or even indulgence. It's a culturally understood reason for not doing something. (Also listed under General Slang)","Unique Local Words/Concepts (Lacking Direct Translation), (also slang, italian origin)"\
"Mala leche","UNIQUE_CONCEPT (Unique Concept / Word)","Can mean ""bad luck"" (tener mala leche) or ""bad intentions/ill will"" (ser mala leche / actuar de mala leche). Literally ""bad milk."" Example (bad luck): ""Perd\'ed la billetera, \'a1qu\'e9 mala leche!"" (I lost my wallet, what bad luck!) Example (bad intentions): ""Me lo dijo con mala leche, para herirme."" (He told me with ill will, to hurt me.)","Unique Concept, Idiom, Luck, Intention"\
"Mufa","UNIQUE_CONCEPT (Unique Concept / Word)","A feeling of bad luck, negativity, or a jinx hanging over someone or a situation. One can ""estar mufado"" (be jinxed) or ""ser mufa"" (be a jinx-bringer).","Unique Local Words/Concepts (Lacking Direct Translation)"\
"Pancho/a","UNIQUE_CONCEPT (Unique Concept / Word)","Can mean a calm/relaxed person, someone clueless/silly, or a familiar address. Also a hot dog. Its versatility and multiple meanings make it unique in usage.","Unique Local Words/Concepts (Lacking Direct Translation), versatile"\
"Quilombo","UNIQUE_CONCEPT (Unique Concept / Word)","While translatable as ""mess"" or ""brothel,"" its nuance in Argentina often implies a uniquely chaotic, tangled, and often frustrating situation that goes beyond a simple mess. It has historical roots and complex cultural weight. (Also listed under General Slang)","Unique Local Words/Concepts (Lacking Direct Translation), (also slang, lunfardo)"\
"Sobremesa","UNIQUE_CONCEPT (Unique Concept / Word)","The tradition of lingering and chatting at the table after a meal is finished. It's a valued social practice. Example: ""El asado estuvo bueno, pero la sobremesa fue lo mejor."" (The barbecue was good, but the after-meal conversation was the best.)","Unique Concept, Cultural Practice, Social, Food"\
"Yeta","UNIQUE_CONCEPT (Unique Concept / Word)","Bad luck, a jinx. Someone can ""ser yeta"" (be a jinx) or ""tener yeta"" (have bad luck). Similar to ""mufa."","Unique Local Words/Concepts (Lacking Direct Translation)"\
"Zarpado/a","UNIQUE_CONCEPT (Unique Concept / Word)","Its wide range of meanings (intense, extreme, very good, awesome, out of line, over the top) depending heavily on context and intonation makes its usage quite distinct. (Also listed under General Slang)","Unique Local Words/Concepts (Lacking Direct Translation), context dependent, (also slang)"\
"Asado","CULTURAL_REFERENCE (Cultural Reference)","A traditional Argentinian barbecue, a very important social and culinary event.",""\
"Dulce de Leche","CULTURAL_REFERENCE (Cultural Reference)","A sweet, caramel-like spread made from milk and sugar, a national obsession.",""\
"Facturas","CULTURAL_REFERENCE (Cultural Reference)","Pastries, typically eaten for breakfast or with mate. Not to be confused with ""factura"" meaning bill/invoice. Example: ""Traje facturas para el mate."" (I brought pastries for the mate.)","Cultural Reference, Food, Breakfast"\
"Gardel","CULTURAL_REFERENCE (Cultural Reference)","Carlos Gardel, the iconic tango singer. To say someone ""es Gardel"" or ""se cree Gardel"" can mean they are the best or think they are the best, sometimes ironically. Phrases like ""Veinte a\'f1os no es nada"" (from his song ""Volver"") are culturally resonant.","Cultural References, historical figure, tango, music"\
"Maradona","CULTURAL_REFERENCE (Cultural Reference)","Diego Maradona, the football legend. References to his goals (e.g., ""la mano de Dios"" - the hand of God), his personality, or saying someone ""es Maradona"" in their field.","Cultural References, historical figure, football, sports"\
"Mate","CULTURAL_REFERENCE (Cultural Reference)","A traditional South American caffeine-rich infused drink, particularly popular in Argentina. It's also a social ritual.",""\
"Piropo","CULTURAL_REFERENCE (Cultural Reference)","A comment, often a ""compliment"" (though frequently unsolicited and potentially unwelcome), made by men to women in the street. It's a complex cultural phenomenon, sometimes seen as charming, often as harassment. Example: ""Le tiraron un piropo cuando caminaba por la calle."" (Someone made a catcall/street compliment to her when she was walking down the street.)","Cultural Reference, Social Interaction, Gender, Complex"\
"Buen d\'eda / Buenas tardes / Buenas noches","GREETING_FAREWELL (Greeting / Farewell)","Good day / Good afternoon / Good evening/night.","Greetings & Farewells (Informal), greeting, time-dependent"\
"Buenas","GREETING_FAREWELL (Greeting / Farewell)","Short for ""buenas tardes"" (good afternoon) or ""buenas noches"" (good evening/night). Can be used as a general greeting.",""\
"Chau","GREETING_FAREWELL (Greeting / Farewell)","Bye. (Very common, from Italian ""ciao"").","Greetings & Farewells (Informal), farewell, italian origin"\
"\'bfC\'f3mo and\'e1s?","GREETING_FAREWELL (Greeting / Farewell)","How are you doing? (Uses ""vos"" conjugation).","Greetings & Farewells (Informal), greeting, vos"\
"Hasta luego","GREETING_FAREWELL (Greeting / Farewell)","See you later.","Greetings & Farewells (Informal), farewell"\
"Hola","GREETING_FAREWELL (Greeting / Farewell)","Hello.","Greetings & Farewells (Informal), greeting"\
"Nos vemos","GREETING_FAREWELL (Greeting / Farewell)","See you.","Greetings & Farewells (Informal), farewell"\
"\'bfQu\'e9 hac\'e9s?","GREETING_FAREWELL (Greeting / Farewell)","What are you doing? / How are you? (Common informal greeting using ""vos""). Example: ""Che, \'bfqu\'e9 hac\'e9s?"" (Hey, what's up?)","Greeting, Informal, Vos"\
"\'bfQu\'e9 onda?","GREETING_FAREWELL (Greeting / Farewell)","What's up? / How's it going? (Informal greeting). Example: ""\'bfQu\'e9 onda, loco?"" (What's up, man?)","Greeting, Informal"\
"\'bfTodo bien?","GREETING_FAREWELL (Greeting / Farewell)","All good? / Everything okay? (Common greeting and response).","Greetings & Farewells (Informal), greeting, response"\
"Bebecito/a","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","Little baby. A very affectionate term, often for a romantic partner or a very young child. Example: ""Te quiero, bebecito."" (I love you, little baby.)","Endearment, Affectionate, Romantic, Diminutive"\
"Bomb\'f3n","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","Sweetie, cutie (literally ""chocolate"" or ""marshmallow""). Often used for attractive people or loved ones. Example: ""\'a1Qu\'e9 bomb\'f3n es tu hijo!"" (What a cutie your son is!)","Endearment, Affectionate, Attraction"\
"Cari\'f1o","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","Darling, dear, sweetie. (Gender-neutral as a noun). Example: ""Hola, cari\'f1o, \'bfc\'f3mo est\'e1s?"" (Hello, darling, how are you?)","Endearment, Affectionate, Common"\
"Che","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","(As an address) Hey, you, mate, pal. (Note: Also listed under SLANG and FILLER_WORD)","Terms of Endearment & Address, address term, (also slang, filler word)"\
"Cielo / Cielito","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","Heaven / Little heaven. Used like ""darling"" or ""sweetheart."" Example: ""Ven aqu\'ed, cielo."" (Come here, sweetheart.)","Endearment, Affectionate, Poetic"\
"Coraz\'f3n","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","Heart / sweetheart.","Terms of Endearment & Address, affectionate"\
"Coraz\'f3n de mel\'f3n","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","Sweetheart (literally ""melon heart""). A playful and affectionate term. Example: ""Adi\'f3s, coraz\'f3n de mel\'f3n."" (Goodbye, sweetheart.)","Endearment, Affectionate, Playful"\
"Cosita rica","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","(Very informal, can be suggestive) Tasty little thing. Example: ""Ven\'ed ac\'e1, cosita rica."" (Come here, tasty little thing.)","Endearment, Informal, Flirtatious, Suggestive"\
"Flaco/Flaca","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","(Literally ""skinny"") Similar to ""gordo/a,"" used affectionately for friends or loved ones, regardless of their build.","Terms of Endearment & Address, affectionate"\
"Gordo/Gorda","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","(Literally ""fatty"") Common term of endearment for loved ones (partners, children, friends), regardless of their weight. Can also be ""Gordi."" Example: ""Hola, gorda, \'bfc\'f3mo est\'e1s?"" (Hi sweetie, how are you?)","Terms of Endearment & Address, affectionate"\
"Lindo/a","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","Pretty, handsome, lovely. Can be used as a direct term of address. Example: ""Gracias, linda."" (Thanks, pretty.)","Endearment, Affectionate, Compliment"\
"Loco/a","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","(Literally ""crazy"") Dude, mate, pal. Used between friends. Example: ""\'bfQu\'e9 hac\'e9s, loco?"" (What are you doing, man?)","Terms of Endearment & Address, address term, friends"\
"Mi amor","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","My love. (Common for partners, family).","Terms of Endearment & Address, affectionate, partners, family"\
"Mi rey / Mi reina","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","My king / My queen. Affectionate and somewhat grand term for a loved one. Example: ""\'bfQu\'e9 necesita mi reina?"" (What does my queen need?)","Endearment, Affectionate, Grand, Romantic"\
"Mi vida","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","My life. A very common and deep term of endearment for loved ones. Example: ""Te amo, mi vida."" (I love you, my life.)","Endearment, Affectionate, Deep, Romantic, Familial"\
"Mijo/Mija","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","Contraction of ""mi hijo/a"" (my son/daughter). Used by parents, but also more broadly as an affectionate term for younger people or loved ones, similar to ""honey"" or ""dear."" Example: ""Mija, ten\'e9 cuidado."" (Honey, be careful.)","Endearment, Affectionate, Familiar, Parental"\
"Negro/Negra","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","(Literally ""black"") Term of endearment for friends, family, or partners, regardless of actual skin color. Can be very affectionate. (Use by outsiders could be misinterpreted).","Terms of Endearment & Address, affectionate, caution"\
"Nene/Nena","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","Boy/Girl, but often used as an affectionate term for children, partners, or close friends, similar to ""kiddo"" or ""sweetie"". Example: ""Ven\'ed, nena, dame un abrazo."" (Come here, sweetie, give me a hug.)","Endearment, Affectionate, Familiar"\
"Papi/Mami Chulo/a","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","(Can be very informal/flirtatious) Daddy/Mommy handsome/pretty. Often used between romantic partners. Example: ""Hola, papi chulo."" (Hello, handsome daddy.)","Endearment, Flirtatious, Romantic, Informal"\
"Precioso/a","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","Precious. A strong term of affection. Example: ""Mi preciosa hija."" (My precious daughter.)","Endearment, Affectionate, Strong"\
"Tesoro","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","Treasure. Used to call someone dear or precious. Example: ""Sos mi tesoro."" (You are my treasure.)","Endearment, Affectionate, Precious"\
"Viejo/a","ENDEARMENT (Endearment / Address)","(Literally ""old man/woman"") Can be used to refer to one's parents (""mis viejos"") or sometimes affectionately between long-term partners.","Terms of Endearment & Address, family, affectionate"\
"Posta","OTHER (Other)","Really, truly, for real. Used to emphasize truth or to ask for confirmation. Example: ""\'bfEn serio te dijo eso? - \'a1Posta!"" (Did he really tell you that? - For real!)",""\
"Flash / Flashear","OTHER (Other)","(Can be a noun or verb) To be surprised, to imagine things, to be mistaken, to have a sudden (often strange) idea or perception. ""Flash"" as a noun can mean something surprising or a sudden insight. Example (verb): ""Flashe\'e9 que te hab\'eda visto ayer."" (I mistakenly thought I saw you yesterday / I hallucinated seeing you.) Example (noun): ""\'a1Qu\'e9 flash!"" (How weird! / What a trip!)",""\
"Alto/Alta","OTHER (Other)","(Literally ""high"" or ""tall"") Used as an intensifier, meaning ""very,"" ""a lot of,"" ""great,"" or ""big."" Example: ""\'a1Alta fiesta!"" (What a great party!) ""Tiene alta facha."" (He's very good-looking.)",""\
\
}